---
title: Use of Mobile Phones and Cameras
adpoted_date: 2013-08-13
review_date: 2014-08-13
signed-by-name: Nick Prater
---

# Policy statement #

We take steps to ensure that children are safe from images being recorded or 
used inappropriately. This includes safeguarding them from the inappropriate 
use of mobile phone cameras. We also take steps to prevent staff being 
distracted from their work.

We recognise that:

* Appropriate use of photographs and video recording are effective ways of 
recording children's progression in the Early Years Foundation Stage.

* Use of mobile telephones and text messaging is useful and valid tool for 
communicating with parents, carers and staff and trustees.

* It is normal for parents and carers to want to record special events in 
their child's time at the pre-school, such as parties, outings and sports 
days.


# Procedures #

## Personal Mobile Phones and Cameras ##

* Parents and visitors are requested not to use their mobile phones whilst 
on the premises.

* Staff, students and volunteers may bring mobile phones into the 
pre-school, however they should be switched off, or set to silent mode and 
stored in the office or kitchen.

* Except in an emergency, mobile phones are not used in the presence of 
children.

* If the pre-school's landline telephone is faulty, the manager will 
nominate one staff member's personal mobile telephone for use in it's place. 

* Staff, students and volunteers ensure that the telephone number of the 
pre-school is known to immediate family and other people who need to contact 
them in an emergency, so that they are not dependent on their personal 
mobile phone as a means of communication.

* Except during breaks, staff, students and volunteers should not make or 
receive personal calls during their working hours. However, in exceptional 
circumstances, personal calls may take place with the agreement of the pre-
school manager or session leader. These should take place in an area away 
from children, such as the office.

* Devices belonging to staff, students or volunteers must not be used to 
record images of children at the pre-school or on outings. The pre-school 
has a dedicated camera for this purpose.

* Staff, students or volunteers must not bring cameras into the pre-school. 
It is noted that most mobile phones incorporate a camera. These are 
acceptable providing their camera facility is not used within the pre-school 
and that these procedures are followed.


## Vigiliance ##

* It is the responsibility of all members of staff to be vigilant and report 
any concerns about the use of mobile phones or cameras, or non-compliance 
with this policy, to the pre-school manager or session leader.

* Concerns will be taken seriously, logged and investigated appropriately 
(see _allegations against staff_ in our [Safeguarding Policy]
(/policies/safeguarding_children.html)).
 
* The pre-school manager, or in her absence, the session leader reserves the 
right to view images stored on mobile phone or camera devices brought into 
the setting should there be any cause for concern over their appropriate 
use.

* Should inappropriate material be found then our Local Authority Designated 
Officer (LADO) will be contacted immediately. We will follow the guidance of 
the LADO and our Disciplinary Procedure.


## Recording children's progression ##

* Photographs and recordings of children are only taken of children if there 
is written permission to do so. Permission is obtained and recorded on the 
registration form for each child when they join the pre-school.

* Children have their photographs taken and video recorded to provide 
evidence of their achievements for developmental records.

* Images may be recorded during indoor and outdoor play and during outings. 
They are displayed in albums and displays within the pre-school and 
incorporated within each child's development records.

* The pre-school has a digital camera and memory cards dedicated for this 
purpose. These are kept on the premises and leave the pre-school only to be 
printed or used on outings. Once photos have been printed, they are wiped 
from the camera's memory card.


## Special Events ##
* With the pre-school manager's permission, parents and carers may use 
mobile phones and cameras to record images of their children during special 
events, such as parties, outings and sports days.

* Parents and carers will be informed of this in advance of the event and 
given the opportunity to raise an objection.

* If an objection is raised, the pre-school manager will decide if such an 
objection is reasonable and whether it warrants a complete ban on cameras, 
or whether alternative arrangements may be made to address the concern.


## External Photographers ##
* Professional photographs are taken at the pre-school at various points 
throughout the year.

* The manager takes all reasonable precautions to ensure that external 
photographers are CRB checked and that they have their own procedures to 
safeguard children from inappropriate use of images.

* Parents and carers will be informed in advance if an external photographer 
will be at the pre-school and given the opportunity to raise an objection.

* If an objection is raised, the pre-school manager will decide if such an 
objection is reasonable and what alternative arrangements are appropriate to 
address the concern.


## Publication ##
* On occasions we may wish to use photographs of children taking part in 
activities on our web site, in promotional activity, or in sharing best 
practice with other pre-schools. In such cases we will seek specific 
permission from the relevant parents.


## Specialist Equipment ##
* Notwithstanding the above, it is recognised that there may be occasions 
when staff, students or volunteers have specialist photographic equipment 
which may be beneficial to the learning activities of the pre-school.

* In such cases, the pre-school manager may grant permission for the member 
of staff to bring such equipment into the pre-school and for it to be used 
to record images of children.

* Such equipment will be used only under the supervision of a second member 
of staff.

* Images recorded on such equipment is handled in the same way as those 
recorded on the pre-school's own equipment: they are kept on the premises 
and leave the pre-school only to be printed or used on outings.

* Parents and carers will be informed in advance of any such proposed 
activity and be given the opportunity to raise an objection.

* If an objection is raised, the pre-school manager will decide if such an 
objection is reasonable and whether the proposed activity should be 
abandoned of whether alternative arrangements are appropriate to address the 
concern.



